---
layout: post
title:  "Leaving Behind Academia"
categories: personal prose
permalink: /writing/:title
---
I stood in a field of wild grasses. They shimmered with their golden stalks and coated at the roots with a matted, green understory. The sun was rising over the Rappahannock river. The light flickering through the gaps in the trees, casting its speckled rays onto the field. Upon feeling the gentle morning light, the dragon flies rose to meet the sunrise. The dew licked the tops of my feet as the wet grass moistened my sneakers. The river's white haze intensified as the sun crept above the horizon.

With nary a reed disturbed, a Northern Harrier entered my sight, gliding over the grasses. With its distinctive white eye-brow and the white, curved parenthesis where the head meets the body, I tensed at its arrival. The dark, brown feathers on its back intermingled with splashes of white and clay. The harrier ignored my presence, stopping its glide and revealing its trademark behavior: hovering in place searching for a meal. It reared its body vertical. The wings rotated and now flapped diagonally toward the ground, bending the grass. After a few moments, it returned to its normal gliding behavior. This went on for some time until I had exhausted my patience to keep looking at one bird. It was a lifer for me. There was no one nearby to share this experience. It was mine alone, and I had savored it as long as I could.

Bald Eagles perched in trees were such a common sight that I found them to be as interesting as the European Starling. So, that is to say, an interesting sight when nothing else had the attention of my binoculars.

I had come to Belle Island State Park on the Northern Neck as the conclusion of my birding trip having finished a grueling seven years to graduate with my doctorate in history. All I wanted to do was walk. Walk the trails in front of me and see birds. I wanted to leave the past, not confront it. I wanted to watch the birds with their hollow eyes, their intensity of the moment.

A few weeks prior, I planned this trip as a capstone experience to defending my dissertation in history. I realized that I needed to escape and simply be my self.

In 2009, I began the doctoral program in history at The George Washington University. Seven and a half years later, I completed the program —- not without stress, mental disarray, and fearing that I would constantly be found out that I was a fraud. I cried. Often, I cried. My existence was encapsulated inside these antiquarian studies, and I had accrued an alarming amount of resentment and unhappiness.

I had never intended to be a birder. Generally, my hobbies involved making model ships: a past time fit for a historian. However, I must have expressed some interest in looking at birds, because my wife handed me a laminated bird pamphlet, shooing me outside the apartment. Before being pushed out the door, she gave me a bulky pair binoculars that felt more like a lead yoke than a personal device to look out of. Standing outside in public, I felt silly. I had a pencil tucked under my newsboy hat, dangling binoculars that swung uncontrollably despite the weight, and a yellowed notepad. However ridiculous my appearance may have been, I wasn't thinking about my research, the words that needed to be written, or assuaging professors' concerns.

I meandered around the neighborhood looking at lawns, up on the tree tops, and in the bushes. At the time, I knew little about bird identification. I thought all those American Robins were Baltimore Orioles, befuddled by a common White-breasted Nuthatch, and mistook a crow for a raven. Yet, despite these wonderful perplexities, a childish excitement bubbled up, a feeling that I had not experienced for a considerable time.

As I walked along the spine of Belle Island, Bald Eagles stood sentry as I headed towards the island's terminus. I recollected the nadir of my graduate program. In March 2016, my advisor told me that I needed more time to revise my dissertation and that I would have to defend my dissertation in the fall rather than spring. My other committee members concurred as I received voluminous criticism scrawled along the chapter margins. I was already behind the graduation timeline. This was the only time that I tarried with the notion to leave the PhD program. I cried. It was awful timing. My wife was vacationing in Florida with friends for the week. The following nights were long, lonely, and dismal.

It is at this point that I fully submersed myself in the birding world. I didn’t care about academia, my dissertation, or history anymore. To be even more honest, I gave up academia as soon as I graduated.

Birds, walking, and the outside were luxuries that I hadn’t indulged in and to do so reaffirmed my humanity. Without concrete successes, it was hard to keep up my enthusiasm for revising the dissertation. The job search resulted in no interviews. A recent Vitae article stated that one PhD obtained a tenure-track position after his fifth-year post doc and 125 applications. I did not have the desire to keep my life on hold.

I reached the end of Belle Island. I unlatched the spotting scope's retractable legs and tightened them. The frosty dew had evaporated, leaving the only evidence of its existing were my soaked shoes. My breath no longer visible, I peered down into the scope's eye piece and surveyed the water. I had hoped for a large raft of waterfowl: Redheads, Gadwalls, Northern Shovelers, Blue Teals, Wood Ducks, or even some common Mallards. However, I must have missed the raft. There was only the gentle lapping of clear water. I removed my gloves; the feeling had returned to my numbed fingers from the previous night's frost. As the temperature climbed, the bird activity thinned as the sun rose to its zenith. The day's doldrum approached.

Not everyday, I could appreciate the sheer number of birds and natural surroundings. As I continued on my dissertation revisions a few months prior, I would peer out my sixth floor apartment window hoping to find something beyond House Sparrows and Starlings. Two times I did find something else: an iridescent Yellow Warbler and a male Scarlet Tanager. Each time, I scrambled to find my binoculars and slid the squeaky door to confirm these new lifers. Each bird peacefully perched on branches, riding them up and down as the wind blew by.

I lifted the spotting scope realizing that I would have to return home from Belle Island the following day. My trip around the Northern Neck was concluding. It was such a special experience. Visiting so many different places, such as Caledon State Park, the Crow's Nest, and the birthplace of George Washington: a stone's throw from Robert E. Lee's plantation house.

The final evening I stayed at a motel outside Reidville. It was under new ownership. She was the kindest person to me, and while I had not prepared for it, we chatted for a few hours about the Northern Neck. She was a transplant from Richmond and had the opportunity to take over the motel. It had been a troubled place where women of the night used the rooms on an hourly basis. Since her taking over, she had redone all the rooms and the whole establishment was quite fetching—and she assured me—that it was completely safe as the police would occasionally drive through the parking lot to check in. Though, I would be the only person there that night. My heart may have skipped a beat.

That evening, I returned from the restaurant in Reidville. A cheeseburger and a shot of bourbon was a nice change from a steady diet of tuna, peanut butter sandwiches, and crimson jerky. I turned into the gravel parking lot, and I locked the rental. There was no city haze. There was only a darkness and a quiet that was so unsettling yet alluring. I knew that there was a field next to the motel, but there was no hint of its existence. The night sky was brilliant and displayed a depth that I had not been accustomed to growing up in the Baltimore suburbs. Instead of gazing upwards, I had a distinct feeling of having my feet lift off the ground. Gravity lost its grip on me. I wasn't looking up but downwards into space. Vertigo crept in as I realized that if gravity continued to fail I would fall away from earth. Everything felt a bit more fragile in that moment.

I shook my head at the thought, suddenly feeling aware of the lack of people. I opened my motel room. The night passed uneventfully, though, one time a car did turn into the gravel parking lot, making my hair stand up. It was the police car making its rounds.