---
layout: post
title:  "Urban Birding at Seven Corners"
date:   2020-08-22 08:58:45 -0400
categories: writing nature-vignettes
---
I bird at the 7 Corners shopping plaza.  There is a pedestrian bridge that evokes the style of a medieval battlement.  The walls are thick, the stairwells sprayed with acrid urine, and two large ramps for physically-impaired or stair-averse people to walk up.  The ramps gently slope towards the turreted towers surrounding the highway.  Broken glass and Durex wrappers peek from the crevices.  Spray paint ligatures accent the egg-shell walls.  They do not hold tightly to their stories of how they arrived at that location.  I see a gentleman lying on the ground, face down.  His sleeveless shirt is stained.  Tangerine spittle colors the asphalt next him.  His feet bare, the shoes removed.  He strains to look up as I pass by, his cheek pockmarked by resting on the ground.  I should feel compassion.  I reach the far side of the pedestrian bridge and position my binoculars to observe my favorite birds: Rock Pigeons.  

On windy days, the flock of pigeons fly in unison.  Hundreds of tubby grey birds fly over head.  No hawk or predator visible.  They simply fly together, practicing.  What's most amazing is how little space there is between each pigeon: turning and climbing in delayed unison.  From a distance, they appear like a swirling sphere where the directional changes reverberate through the avian mass.  The school of pigeons eventually loses its constitution as bits break off at various lamp posts until it is dissolved.  In a few minutes, and in response to no external stimulus, the Rock Pigeons repeat this process.  A small group starts, then another group leaves their lamp post to join.  This time, I hear the beginning notes: layers of bass wing beats with treble pigeon calls.  Through my binoculars, I catch the iridescent pink and red glint of the pigeon wings.  While most pigeons are blueish grey, some are brown, others bovine-inspired.  After finishing the flight, they land near a bus stop where people place food and water for them.  The flock transforms into a herd.  Bopping their heads as they take their turns pecking at the seeds and picking at the wonder bread.  

People have passed me.  They have hustled to their cars, entered stores, or run down a departing metro bus.  Sometimes they ask what I am looking at, sometimes they ignore me, and most of the time, they simply want to get to where they are going.  They step over the man with the spittle.  I return home, feeling slightly rejuvenated.  However, I know if I explain my experience, it won't convey the moment and the burst of happiness that it gave me.  